----------------
Date: 2016-03-19
Author: Sonny Jeon
Subject: No variable spindle and spindle speed fix.

- Soft limit errors were stuck in a feed hold without notifying the
user why it was in a hold. When resumed, the soft limit error would
kick in. Issue should be fixed to behave as intended to automatically
hold and issue a soft limit alarm once the machine has come to a stop.


----------------
Date: 2016-03-11
Author: Sonny Jeon
Subject: Soft limit error bug fix.

- Soft limit errors were stuck in a feed hold without notifying the
user why it was in a hold. When resumed, the soft limit error would
kick in. Issue should be fixed to behave as intended. To automatically
hold and issue a soft limit alarm once the machine has come to a stop.


----------------
Date: 2016-03-04
Author: Sonny Jeon
Subject: Applied master branch bug fixes.

- Planner was under-estimating maximum speeds through straight
junctions in certain cases. The calculations have been updated to be
more accurate.

- Strange sizeof() bug in the most recent releases. Manifested as an
alarm upon a power up even when homing was disabled. Fixed by declaring
sizeof() with struct types, rather than variable names, even though
they were validated to give the same value.

- Spindle speed zero should disable the spindle. Now fixed.

- New configuration option for inverting certain limit pins. Handy for
mixed NO and NC switch machines. See config.h for details.


----------------
Date: 2015-11-09
Author: Sonny Jeon
Subject: Pin state reporting of all pins. Flash optimization.

- New pin state realtime reporting feature. Instead of `Lim:000` for
limit state reports, the new feature shows `Pin:000|0|0000`, or
something similar. The `|` delimited fields indicate xyz limits, probe,
and control pin states, where 0 is always not triggered, and 1 is
triggered. Invert masks ARE accounted for.
  Each field may be enabled or disabled via the `$10` status report
setting. The probe and control pin flags are bits 5 and 6, respectively.

- Remove the now deprecated `REPORT_CONTROL_PIN_STATE` option in
config.h

- The old limit pin reports `Lim:000` may be re-enabled by commenting
out `REPORT_ALL_PIN_STATES` in config.h.

- Incremented the version letter (v1.0c) to indicate the change in
reporting style.

- Replaced all bit_true_atomic and bit_false_atomic macros with
function calls. This saved a couple hundred bytes of flash.

